one of the most mysterious and
unexplored areas left on this
planet is the ocean floor
we know next to nothing about it
we don't know what's down there
what creatures lurk in its
depths or even what it looks
like but gravity it might be
able to lend us a hand
hey guys Julia here for dnews
scientists recently used what's
called gravity mapping to map
the ocean floor and just like
that sounds it's when satellites
measure gravity to tell the
topography of a place in a study
published in the journal science
researchers merge data from two
satellites to reveal the
underwater map the satellites
cry us at two and Jason one
measure the distance from their
location in space to the surface
of the land or water on Earth
after filtering out all the
noise from waves and other
temporary changes in the ocean
surface the satellites found
certain areas in the ocean with
more gravity than others
that's because the mass of a
mountain under the ocean has
more gravitational pool than the
water around it so the water
kind of piles up on top of the
mountain and creates different
heights on the surface of the
water
a lower area has less gravity
than a higher area because
there's less mass using these
changes a gravity scientists can
measure the sea floor by
measuring the surface of the
ocean
the results confirm some
previous data on the bottom of
the ocean and found some new
discoveries -
in a study published in the
journal earth and planetary
science letters researchers
announced the discovery of a
tiny new tectonic plate called
the Mavericks microplate well
most tectonic plates are huge
like thousands of kilometers
across this little guy is just a
hundred fifty kilometers across
about half the size of England
while tiny and broke off of a
much bigger plate when the
Indian plate and the Eurasian
Plate crash into each other
about 47 million years ago this
map reveals how little we know
about the world around us
we've only mapped about point
zero five percent of the ocean
floor to our highest level of
resolution with sonar
most recently we are using
gravity mapping but 2,000 years
ago
guys were just throwing measured
ropes into the ocean with
weights on the ends
there's still a lot we don't
know we do know gravity is an
equally distributed around our
planet
how much gravity you experience
at a specific point on the
surface can change because earth
is more oblong and spherical
it's not equally dens and the
distance from the center of the
earth to where you stand can
vary gravity's pull on you
knowing all this gravitational
mapping has helped reveal new
information about our planet
like a study published in the
journal Geophysical Research
Letters found that the lowest
acceleration due to gravity
it was on Mount Nevada wash
Quran in Peru while the highest
is in the Arctic Ocean as New
Scientist puts it if you fell
from a height of a hundred
meters you would hit the surface
in Peru about 16 milliseconds
later than an Arctic weird right
so why do we care besides the
whole weighing less on a
mountain in Peru thing
well it's helpful for building
things engineers need to know
the local gravity layout when
designing buildings and
infrastructure and of course
measuring gravity is awesome
just for a better understanding
of the bottom of the ocean maybe
we'll finally know exactly what
our home planet looks like the
oceans take up over seventy
percent of this planet's surface
yet we know so little about them
trace fills you in on all the
bottomless details we know over
on test 2 plus almost a third of
our planet is the Pacific Ocean
and in case you're wondering in
terms of measurement that is
1.87 quintillion gallons
it's a lot of water so map nerds
out there what is your favorite
imager map of our pale blue dot
let me know down in the comments
below don't forget to hit those
like and subscribe buttons and
keep coming back to dnews we've
got new episodes every day the
week